# iacchus-table-language

This project aims to develop a simple, concise and robust language for making
bi-dimensional data tables

[https://github.com.iacchus/iacchus-table-language](https://github.com.iacchus/iacchus-table-language)

## Pre alpha design

We are currently in pre alpha.

**preprocessor** - parses input data and check for error in language

**procesor** - formats preprocessed data in turns of creating a sanitized
data base to be used by

**postprocessor** - which transform processed data in other media, like html,
markdown, unicode etc. Each of these formats should have it's own postprocess,
depending on with type of output we desire.

## Language specification

For now we are still giving it touches, but the main specification is in
[brazilian portuguese] test.itl file at the root of this repository.

## Demo or it didn't happen

We have a html demo file generated by our proof-of-concept postprocessor at our
root directory, the file name is test.html. It was generated with data from the
test.itl file.

## ITML Language Specification

(this is pre-alpha and is currently in development)

Contents:

- introduction: why and how?
- specification
  - the header
  - the body
  - formatting

### Introduction: Why, and how?

We are trying to follow the steps of simple languages like markdown and toml,
which simply do their job well done and nothing else.

Is is simple and legible, and writing them goes in the natural process of
writing text in a text editor, and not in drawing tables having to adjust the
table columns when more text is added. In ITML you simple state the format
and state the cols in the first line, and the each subsequent line or lines, if
we use indentation in an entry, or paragraphs if we use space between indented
text of the same cell, will be the contents of a table cell.

### The Header

The first line of the stream contains the string `itbl` and the names of all
columns of the table, using shell like escape, like this:

```
itbl "Column 1" Column\ 2 Column3
```

There will be three columns in this description. "Column 1" "Column 2" and
"Column". The backslash in 'Column 2' is used to escape espaces, so they don't get splitted
but are partes of the same argument. As seen in 'Column 1', the quotation marks
also can be used to escape spaces inside a column name, very like in a command
line shell.

### Formatting

One of the caracteristics which we have in mind as we develop the ITML-lang is
readability from the very `itbl` source.

SO, we will try to attain to best practices in writing the source so that we
respect some rules, even these rules not being enforced by the ITML
specification.

Some of these rules we are borrowing from the Python language, which uses
indentation syntatically as well and have being proven to be good through the
time and use.

#### Max character width

The ITBL format lines should have the maximum of 79 characters per line.
Additional characters should be broken to the next line and indented.

The ITBL format indentation should not use TAB, and should be indented with
2 or 4 spaces, concisely. After pre-alpha we will see which case is better and
change this documentation with the urging to use 2 or 4 spaces, which be
better.

The lines representing the cells of one row in the ITML format should have an
empty line after the number of columns. Simple like this:

```
itbl COLUMN1 COLUMN2 COLUMN3  # then we have 3 columns

This text is the first column. 
This text is the second column. 
This text is the third column.

After the newline, this is the first column of the second row.
And this is the second column of the second row.
And this is the last(3rd) column of the second row.
```

As seen above, after the three columns of the first row we add a blank line to
improve readability of the source. The newline has no syntatic meaning, as we
are all consenting adults here, but it should be used to improve readability.

The inline comments in ITML format, this is, the comments made after a line of
text should have too espaces before the `#` character.
